README.md, before:

# Combining audio control and style transfer using latent diffusion

Official repository for  _Combining audio control and style transfer using latent diffusion_ by Nils Demerlé, Philippe Esling, Guillaume Doras and David Genova accepted at ISMIR 2024 ([paper link](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2408.00196)).

Training the model requires three steps : processing the dataset, training an autoencoder, then training the diffusion model.


### Dataset preparation

```bash
python dataset/split_to_lmdb.py --input_path /path/to/audio_dataset --output_path /path/to/audio_dataset/out_lmdb
```

Or to use slakh with midi processing (after downloading Slakh2100  [here](http://www.slakh.com/)) :

```bash
python dataset/split_to_lmdb_midi.py --input_path /path/to/slakh --output_path /path/to/slakh/out_lmdb_midi --slakh True
```

### Autoencoder training

```bash
python train_autoencoder.py --name my_autoencoder --db_path /path/to/lmdb --gpu #
```
Once the autoencoder is trained, it must be exported to a torchscript .pt file : 

```bash
 python export_autoencoder.py --name my_autoencoder --step ##
```

It is possible to skip this whole phase and use a pretrained autoencoder such as Encodec, wrapped in a nn.module with encode and decode methods. 

### Model training
The model training is configured with gin config files.
To train the audio to audio model :
```bash
 python train_diffusion.py --db_path /data/nils/datasets/slakh/lmdb_midi/ --config midi --dataset_type midi --gpu #
```
To train the midi-to-audio model : 
```bash
 python train_diffusion.py --db_path /path/to/lmdb --config main --dataset_type waveform --gpu #
```

### Inference and evaluation
TBA

Commit message:

added pretrained models and inference notebooks + minor bugs

README.md, after:

# Combining audio control and style transfer using latent diffusion

Official repository for  _Combining audio control and style transfer using latent diffusion_ by Nils Demerlé, Philippe Esling, Guillaume Doras and David Genova accepted at ISMIR 2024 ([paper link](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2408.00196)).

Training the model requires three steps : processing the dataset, training an autoencoder, then training the diffusion model.


### Dataset preparation

```bash
python dataset/split_to_lmdb.py --input_path /path/to/audio_dataset --output_path /path/to/audio_dataset/out_lmdb
```

Or to use slakh with midi processing (after downloading Slakh2100  [here](http://www.slakh.com/)) :

```bash
python dataset/split_to_lmdb_midi.py --input_path /path/to/slakh --output_path /path/to/slakh/out_lmdb_midi --slakh True
```

### Autoencoder training

```bash
python train_autoencoder.py --name my_autoencoder --db_path /path/to/lmdb --gpu #
```
Once the autoencoder is trained, it must be exported to a torchscript .pt file : 

```bash
 python export_autoencoder.py --name my_autoencoder --step ##
```

It is possible to skip this whole phase and use a pretrained autoencoder such as Encodec, wrapped in a nn.module with encode and decode methods. 

### Model training
The model training is configured with gin config files.
To train the audio to audio model :
```bash
 python train_diffusion.py --db_path /path/to/lmdb --config midi --dataset_type midi --gpu #
```
To train the midi-to-audio model : 
```bash
 python train_diffusion.py --db_path /path/to/lmdb --config main --dataset_type waveform --gpu #
```

### Pretrained models

Three pretraiend models are now available : 
1. Audio to audio transfer model trained on [Slakh](http://www.slakh.com/)
2. Audio to audio transfer model trained on multiple datasets (Maestro, URMP, Filobass, GuitarSet...)
3. MIDI-to-audio model trained on [Slakh](http://www.slakh.com/)

You can download the autoencoder and diffusion model checkpoints [here](https://nubo.ircam.fr/index.php/s/8xaXbQtcY4n3Mg9/download). Make sure you copy the pretrained models in `./pretrained`. The notebooks in `./notebooks` demonstrate how to load a model and generate audio from midi and audio files. You can also use the autoencoder checkpoints to train your own diffusion models.
